1.13
Exercises Exercise 1 
What is the function of the secondary memory in a computer? 
a) Execute all of the computation and logic of the program 
b) Retrieve web pages over the Internet 
√c) Store information for the long term – even beyond a power cycle        
d) Take input from the user 

Exercise2
What is a program?
Stored instruction for a computer to run for a particular purpose.

Exercise3
What is the difference between a compiler and an interpreter? 
Interpreter interprets the instructions(code) on the fly while the compiler needs to be handed the entire program in a file,
then translate high-level language into machine language.

Exercise 4
Which of the following contains “machine code”?
√a) The Python interpreter
b) The keyboard
c) Python source file
d) A word processing document 

Exercise 5
What is wrong with the following code: 
>>> primt 'Hello world!'
File "<stdin>", line 1 
primt 'Hello world!'
                   ^ 
SyntaxError: invalid syntax 
>>>

'primt' is a wrong key. It should be 'print'.

Exercise 6
Where in the computer is a variable such as “X” stored after the following Python line finishes? 
x = 123
a) Central processing unit 
√b) Main Memory 
c) Secondary Memory 
d) Input Devices 
e) Output Devices 

Exercise 7
What will the following program print out: 
x = 43 
x = x + 1
print x 

a) 43 
√b) 44 
c) x + 1 
d) Error because x = x + 1 is not possible mathematically 

Exercise 8
Explain each of the following using an example of a human capability: 
(1) Central processing unit, (2) Main Memory, (3) Secondary Memory, (4) Input Device, and (5) Output Device. 
For example, “What is the human equivalent to a CentralProcessing Unit”? 

Exercise 9

Severance, Charles (2014-04-28). Python for Informatics: Exploring Information: Exploring Information (p. 18).  . Kindle Edition. 

2.15Exercises 
Exercise 2
Write a program that uses raw_input to prompt a user for their name and then welcomes them. 
Enter your name: Chuck 
Hello Chuck 

name=raw_input();
print 
Exercise 3
Write a program to prompt the user for hours and rate per hour to compute gross pay. 
Enter Hours: 35 
Enter Rate: 2.75 
Pay: 96.25 
We won’t worry about making sure our pay has exactly two digits after the decimal place for now. 
If you want, you can play with the built-in Python round function to properly round the resulting pay to two decimal places.

Severance, Charles (2014-04-28). Python for Informatics: Exploring Information: Exploring Information (p. 30).  . Kindle Edition. 
